Chemboy 0.3
-----------

Chemboy is a program to do basic chemistry calculations. It was born
out of the memory of a chemistry class which assigned large numbers of
problems which could be solved by doing the same tedious calculation
over and over again. For example, suppose that you wanted to know the
mass of 2.8 mol of methane (C H4). You could figure that since the
atomic weight of carbon was 12.011 g/mol (tediously looking it up in
the periodic table) and the atomic weight of hydrogen was 1.00794
g/mol (or about 1 g/mol), and there were four hydrogens, the formula
weight of C H4 was 12.011+4*1.00794 = 16.042759 g/mol, and multiply
this by 2.8 to get the final answer.

That's a lot of work. So, with Chemboy, you can simplify most parts of
that process. To save yourself the trouble of looking in the periodic
table, you can type "c" and "h" to look up carbon and hydrogen. (You
could also type "carbon" and "hydrogen", or even their atomic numbers,
but why would you want to?) You can type "C H4" (or "c h4"---Chemboy
isn't case sensitive) to get the formula weight of methane. Or you
could just ask Chemboy for the final answer from the beginning by
typing "2.8 mol C H4", to which it would reply "2.8 mol of C H4,
44.919724 g, 62.77467 L at STP". See how much time this could save?

Chemboy can also speed up use of Boyle's Law, Charles' Law, the
Combined gas Law, and the Ideal gas Law. Chemboy does the equivalent
of solving all the equations for you behind the scenes (the specific
technique is kind of cool, but beyond the scope of this readme).


Installation
------------

Chemboy can run just about anywhere in some form or another. The
simplest way to install it, for Lispers, is to use asdf-install. If
you're on Windows, you should probably download the installer for
Windows.

There are three interfaces. First, and most widely useful, is the
text-based interface. This will run anywhere. It presents you with a
simple prompt at which you can type queries. It is perfectly usable,
and the only thing wrong with it is that some people are oddly biased
against anything that resembles a command line.

The second interface is based on Ltk. It requires Tcl/tk, and should
run well on Linux, Mac OS X, and Windows---but don't count on
Windows. It doesn't support the laws (ideal gas law, etc.), but it can
do the rest fairly well. It is still rough and unfinished.

Finally, for those of you lucky enough to use LispWorks, there is a
CAPI-based GUI. This GUI looks snazzy on Linux, and it's fully
featured on any OS, but it looks utterly lousy on Windows. So I repeat
my mantra: don't count on Windows.

Chemboy is ANSI Common Lisp, and should run on any Common Lisp
implementation. That said, you can't tell until you test. Chemboy has
been tested on:

* SBCL 0.8.10
* LispWorks
* Corman Lisp 2.5

Corman Lisp requires a little extra setting up, but that's the price
you pay for using the youngest and least ANSI-compliant (but very
useful) Common Lisp out there.


Starting it
-----------

To start the text interface, call (chemboy-text:chemboy-repl).

To start the Ltk interface, load gui.lisp in the Chemboy source
distribution and call (chemboy-gui:run-chemboy-gui)

To start the CAPI interface, load capi-gui.lisp in the Chemboy source
didstribution and call:
(capi:display (make-instance 'capi-gui::chemboy-capi-gui))


License
-------

Released under the LLGPL (practically identical with the LGPL).



For more information, see http://common-lisp.net/project/chemboy/


Peter Scott <sketerpot@gmail.com>
November 2004